# STATS251F Notes

#### By Jiawei Wang

**[Unit1.pdf](https://github.com/Angold-4/UniversitySources/blob/master/2020Autumn/STATS251F/Lecture_Notes/Unit%201%20-%20Basic%20Concepts%20of%20Statistics.pdf)**


<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->

* [Unit1 -- Basic Concepts of Statistics](#unit1----basic-concepts-of-statistics)
    * [Statistic data](#statistic-data)
        * [Primary data](#primary-data)
        * [Secondary data](#secondary-data)
        * [Merits of Primary Data](#merits-of-primary-data)
        * [Demerits of Primary Data](#demerits-of-primary-data)
        * [Merits of Secondary Data](#merits-of-secondary-data)
        * [Demerits of Secondary Data](#demerits-of-secondary-data)
    * [Variable and Data](#variable-and-data)
        * [Variable](#variable)
        * [Data](#data)
        * [Quantitative Data](#quantitative-data)
        * [Discrete Data](#discrete-data)
        * [Continuous Data](#continuous-data)
    * [Levels of Measurement Scales](#levels-of-measurement-scales)
        * [Nominal Scale](#nominal-scale)
        * [Ordinal Scale](#ordinal-scale)
        * [Interval Scale](#interval-scale)
        * [Ratio Scale](#ratio-scale)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

## Unit1 -- Basic Concepts of Statistics

### Statistic data

#### Primary data
This source of data has been purposely collected for particular enquiries, e.g. sample surveys, observations, interviews.<br>

#### Secondary data
Secondary data are of two kinds: internal and external. This source of data has been collected for some other enquiries than the one of immediate interest (i.e. primary data). Secondary data are generated by a company or an organization such as a university or a chamber of commerce. People can refer to these published secondary data (historical data) for their own purposes.

<br>

#### Merits of Primary Data
1. **The investigator can know where the data came from, the circumstances under which they were collected.<br>**
2. **The investigator can know any limitations or inadequacies in the data.**
3. They relate directly to that person's research or study.

#### Demerits of Primary Data
1. **Primary data are usually more difficult, costly and time consuming and man power to collect.**
2. It often takes a long time to process the primary data.

<br>


#### Merits of Secondary Data
1. **Secondary data can usually be obtained more quickly and at lower cost than primary data.**
2. Secondary data can help plan the collection of primary data
3. Sometimes primary data do not exist in such situation one has to confine the research on secondary data, and the Secondary data can be used<br>
> **e.g. Social and economic researchers consider secondary data essential because it is impossible to conduct a survey to capture past changes and/or developments.**

#### Demerits of Secondary Data
1. The results from secondary data may not exactly fit one’s research questions.
2. **The researcher cannot check the data, and thus, their reliability may be questionable.**


### Variable and Data

#### Variable
**A characteristic that varies from one person or thing to another is called a variable.**<br>
e.g. height, weight, gender, marital status, age, race, educational attainment

#### Data
**Information obtained by observing values of a variable.**<br>
e.g.: measure the weights (variable under study) of a class of students
<br>
**Types of Data:**<br>
**Qualitative Data / Categorical Data**<br>
**Data obtained from a variable that yields non-numerical data**<br>
e.g.: gender, race, educational attainment<br>

#### Quantitative Data
**Data obtained from a variable that yields numerical data**<br>
e.g.: height, weight, age

#### Discrete Data
**Discrete data whose possible values can be listed, even the list may continue indefinitely.<br>**
e.g.: number of iphones, number of brothers, number of cars, etc.

#### Continuous Data
**Continuous data whose possible values form some interval of numbers.**<br>
e.g. Peter’s weight is 50kg. Actually, his weight may lie in the range:<br>
```[49.5kg, 50.5kg) = 49.5kg ≤ weight < 50.5kg```

<br>


### Levels of Measurement Scales
#### Nominal Scale
If the observed data are merely classified into various <u>**distinct**</u> categories in which <u>**no ordering**</u> is implied, a nominal level of measurement is achieved.<br>
Example:<br>
gender (male, female), answers to a question (true or false), country of origin (China, U.S., Canada, etc.with no ordering), etc.

#### Ordinal Scale
If the observed data are classified into distinct categories in which <u>**ordering is implied**</u>, an ordinal level of measurement is attained.<br>
Example:<br>
educational attainment (primary, secondary, post-secondary, university), size (small, medium, large), etc.


#### Interval Scale
**An interval scale is an ordered scale in which the <u>difference</u> between the measurements is a <u>meaningful</u> quantity.**<br>

There is no true zero point in the interval scale. The “0” demarcation is arbitrary, not real.<br>
**Maybe we can understand in this way: There is no meaning in any indivitual number, only comparing two or more numbers can bring it meaning**<br>

Examples:<br>

1. **Temperature** : A temperature reading of 67°C is 2°C warmer than 65°C. This 2°C difference is the same as the difference between 35 °C and 33 °C, in terms of warmth. And we can't say 60°C is twice as hot as 30°C (also can't say 0°C means there is no temprature)

2. **Year**: The distances between each year are the same, but there is no absolute zero. We can only guess about the origins of the earth.

3. **IQ score**: Every point more on an intelligence test is the same. There is no absolute zero in an intelligence test.<br>


#### Ratio Scale
**A ratio scale is an ordered scale in which the difference between the measurements is a <u>meaningful quantity</u> (Which means there is a true zero point).**<br>

**Examples:**<br>
1. A person who is 1.8m tall is twice as tall as someone who is 0.9m tall.
2. 20kg mass of an object is twice as heavy as 10kg mass of another object.
  
<br>
